# Crossword Creation
This was a project I made that takes an input "seed" (example in 'data/tofill.txt'), fills it with random letters, and then progressively shapes it into a valid crossword. I coded it after an AP Stats project, where my group and I collected data from NYT Daily Crosswords; I had this mass amount of clue/answer pairs and thought I ought to do something with it.

## How It Works
First, the program reads the user input from 'data/tofill.txt'. This first contains a header with a pair of numbers separated by a space, containing first the amount of rows and then amount of columns in the crossword. It then has some number of rows describing the crossword frame. Any '#' represents a border, any '.' represents a placeable space, and any letter is part of a clue that the user wants to be in the crossword (note that these can only be across in the current state of the program).

The clues that are set in stone by the user are marked as being unmodifiable by the program, and the rest of the blank spaces are filled with random letters according to letter frequencies in the English language.

Now, the program starts picking answers to replace. It does this by a scoring algorithm I built, that considers how long the replaced word is, what the letters in the word are, whether it replaces something that is already a word, and whether the words it "crosses" in the other direction become/are no longer words when we make this replacement. Each score also gets multiplied by a random number to avoid local maxima. Furthermore, each placement position (i.e. 34 across) keeps track of how many times it's been replaced and applies a penalty based on this number to ensure the program doesn't get stuck on a single pair of clues. Each possible word placement is considered, and the one with the best score is chosen.

Slowly, non-words are replaced until the program either: 1) reaches a valid solution, or 2) reaches a local maximum that it's unable to escape. Because this is possible (and even likely at times, depending on the seed), I have the program restart with a different initial randomization after a certain amount of time. Whenever it reaches a satisfactory solution, it prints it to 'output/success.txt'. I also have it print out near-successes (i.e. missing a single word) in the file 'output/almost.txt' in case the user wants to correct it manually the first time each randomization.

## User Guide
As I explained in "How It Works", if you want to use this program to create your own crosswords, you need to input an initial seed in 'data/tofill.txt'. Absolutely necessary for this file is the dimensions of the crossword you want, as well as an outline of where each clue should go. Note that if you don't fill in blank spaces with '.' and borders with '#' for all places where a clue could go, the **program will not work.** For outlines, I recommend you go to a free crossword website (like the one by dictionary.com) and simply take one from there. You can also create your own, but be careful if you choose to do this! The words database doesn't have any words of length 2 or less, so any possible place for clues needs to be at least 3 letters long.

Recommended is also that you create a theme for the crossword. Not only does this help the program slot some of the longer words, it's also fun! If you need an example of what a theme can look like, take a look at the seed currently in 'data/tofill.txt'. For that, I chose 4 movies that we covered during my AP Literature film unit and completed the symmetry by adding "LITFILMS" as the fifth clue, also giving a hint to the other 4 if you manage to get that one.

Then run the program, 'src/App.java' (however you usually run programs). It should print out the initial seed with random letters added, and then it print a progress bar every time it makes a replacement. If the progress bar ever decrements, don't worry--it's meant to do that. Eventually, it should stop printing. That means it's done, and your completed crossword should be at the bottom of the 'output/success.txt' file.

If you want a nice output instead of a just a collection of words, use the helper program found in 'src/OutputCross.java'. Input the crossword you want to clue-ify into 'outputBin.txt', taken from 'data/success.txt', then add a header to the top following this format: "<rows> <cols> <day of week>". The day of week is the day of the week's difficulty you want to simulate (i.e. input 0 for Monday level difficulty, 1 for Tuesday, etc.) After running the program, you should get a nicely formatted crossword at the bottom of 'output/outputCross.txt'.

## A Note On Success Rate
Because the program relies heavily on randomness to work, it's inevitable that it... well, **won't** at times. Based on the testing I've done, the success rate of finding a valid crossword depends mostly on the seed you give the program. Specifically, smaller boards have a higher success rate (i.e. a 5x5 cross is WAY more likely to succeed than a 15x15 cross), and more open boards have a lower success rate.  Furthermore, if your theme has letters that are uncommon find in their respective positions in the words in the cross directions, it might be harder to get a valid crossword. If you find that your seed can't get a valid cross, even after several attempts, it's likely that it's just hard to find a valid solution for your seed. This means you likely need to change your theme and/or make the layout more cramped by adding more walls.
